---
layout: post
title: An introduction to Anyons
subtitle: Vibing in flatland
tags: [quantum, cond-mat, seminar-series]
katex: true
---

I have very little orginial to contribute here, so again, [my link to the
source I'm going off](https://phas.ubc.ca/~berciu/TEACHING/PHYS502/PROJECTS/20-Anyons-AD.pdf)


# The State I'm In

Take the following as given:
- Reality is described by state vectors.
- The laws of physics are the same under translations.
- There is a particle.

This is undergraduate quantum mechanics, where a singe-particle state $$\ket{\psi}$$ acted on by a
single-particle Hamiltonian $$\hat{H}_1$$ is studied by a (statistically speaking) single student.
There's a cornucopia of operators $$\hat{r}, \hat{p}, \hat{S}^z$$ that can give us
enough information to totally specify the quantum state up to a phase. The eigenvectors of these
commuting operators are a basis for the Hilbert space, $$H_1$$.

Let's add another particle:

- There are now at least two particles that are the same for all intents and purposes.

Now the Hilbert space is $$H_1\otimes H_1$$, and we have to duplicate all of our operators: $$r_1,
r_2, S^z_1, S^z_2,...$$. These act only on their respective Hilbert spaces, e.g. $$r_1 = r \otimes
1, r_2 = 1 \otimes r$$. The issue with _indistinguishable_ particles is that such a separated
operator is not physical - we can only reasonably deal with operators that are somehow averaged over all indistinguishable possibilities.

Consider two spin-$$S$$ that are "indistinguishable". The only
smooth exchange-symmetric operators one can construct are of the form $$F(S^\alpha_1 +
S^\alpha_2)$$, for some smooth real function $$F$$, so it suffices to consider only the total spin
$$J = S_1 + S_2$$. The eigenvalues of $$J$$ may be any integer between $$-2S ... 0 ... 2S$$. 

Even in the simplest case of $$S=1/2$$, there is a degeneracy in the 0 eigenvalue. This is an
\textit{exchange degeneracy}, and it can only be lifted by the _swap operator_ $$P_{12}$$, which
interchanges labels and distinguishes $$\ket{\uparrow \downarrow} -\ket{\downarrow \uparrow}$$
from $$\ket{\uparrow \downarrow} + \ket{\downarrow \uparrow}$$. It then makes sense to decompose the
Hilbert space into exchange even and exchange odd sectors, $$\mathcal{H} = \mathcal{H}^- \oplus
\mathcal{H}^+$$, where the former is 1D and the latter 3D. _Aside: these are called "singlets" and
"triplets"._ It's tempting at this point to define "indistinguishable" to mean "$$H$$ is invariant
under permutations", and generally speaking, this is the common interpretation of the word. 
These $$P$$-eigenspaces are called "fermionic" (-) or "bosonic" (+). 

It is a fundamental fact of the universe that fermion states and boson states do not mix. (i.e. you
can't have a superposition of fermion and boson). That suggests that if you have two spin-1/2
fermions in 0D space, as in the previous example, then their combined spin can _only_ be zero.
Likewise, you can view spin 1 as the "bosonic eigenspace of two spin-1/2s", though that terminology
is nonstandard. For representation-theoretic reasons, it's conventional to call these spaces $$\mathcal{H}^+ = \mathbf{1} =
\mathrm{Span}\{\ket{\uparrow\uparrow},\frac{1}{\sqrt{2}}\left[\ket{\uparrow\downarrow} +
\ket{\downarrow\uparrow}\right],\ket{\downarrow\downarrow}\}$$ and  $$\mathcal{H}^- = \mathbf{0}
=\frac{1}{\sqrt{2}}\left[\ket{\uparrow\downarrow} - \ket{\downarrow\uparrow}\right]\}$$.


_Note: if there are more
physical observables, i.e. $$\mathcal{H} = \mathcal{H}_1 \otimes \mathcal{H}_2$$, then an
overall-fermionic state might "look" bosonic when restricted to a subspace!_


## The Helium Atom

As a more realistic example, consider a Hamiltonian based on a helium atom in a magnetic field (in
Hartree units)

$$H_{\mathrm{He}} = -\frac{p_1^2}{2} - \frac{p_2^2}{2} - \frac{2}{|r_1|} - \frac{2}{|r_2|} +
\frac{u}{|r_1 -r_2|} + \gamma_L B \cdot (L_1 + L_2) + \gamma_S B \cdot (S_1 + S_2) $$

Clearly, this Hamiltonian is invariant under $$P_{12}$$. There are more key features, however:
1. If $$u>0$$, the eigenvalues of $$r_{1}\otimes r_{2}$$ are a **strict** subset of $$\mathbb{R}^6$$ - the singularity
  caused by Coulomb repulsion $$1/|r_1-r_2|$$ means that any finite energy state has
  $$r_1 \neq r_2$$.
2. When the external field $$B$$ is zero, the Hamiltonian does not act on the spin space at all.
3. When the parameter $$u$$ (which is in real helium 1) is set to zero, the Hilbert space decouples completely into two Hydrogen Hamiltonians.

If we take "Real states are $$P$$ eigenstates" to be gospel, we can get a surprising result in the
case $$u=0$$. Writing $$\ket{n,m,m_l,\updownarrow}$$ for canonical hydrogenic wavefunctions, there's
a very natural basis for the total Hilbert space $$\mathcal{H} = \mathcal{H}_1\otimes \mathcal{H}_1$$. Write $$\mathcal{R}$$ for the space containing the spatial part of the wavefunction, $$\mathcal{S} = \mathrm{Span}\{\ket{\uparrow}, \ket{\downarrow}\}$$ for the spin part. Let's insist that electrons are fermions, for the sake of argument.

<!-- $$\{\ket{n,m,m_l,m_s}\otimes \ket{n',m',m_l',m_s'} | n = 1,..., l = 0,...,n-1, m_l=-l...l, m_s =
 \updownarrow\}$$ -->

$$\mathcal{H} = \mathcal{R}\otimes \mathcal{S} = (\mathcal{R}^- \oplus
\mathcal{R}^+)\otimes (\mathcal{S}^- \oplus \mathcal{S}^+) \\
\mathcal{H}^- = \mathcal{R}^- \otimes \mathcal{S}^+ \oplus \mathcal{R}^+ \otimes \mathcal{S}^- $$

This actually gives us a lot of physics for free. The ground state of hydrogen is $$\ket{100}$$, so
the ground state of helium will have spatial part
$$\ket{100}\otimes\ket{100}$$. This is in $$\mathcal{R}^+$$, meaning that the spin configuration
must be the unique state in $$\mathcal{S}^-$$. This result is often referred to as _the ground state of
helium is a spin singlet_.

Now look at excited states. There is a choice to make about whether we want the spin function to be odd or even - 
$$\ket{-} = (\ket{100}\otimes\ket{nml} + \ket{nml}\otimes\ket{100})\otimes \ket{j=0,m_j=0}$$,
$$\ket{+} = (\ket{100}\otimes\ket{nml} - \ket{nml}\otimes\ket{100})\otimes \ket{j=1,m_j}$$
where $$\ket{0,0} \in \mathbf{0}, \ket{1,m_j} \in \mathbf{1}$$ and $$n>1$$ guarantees that the
inversion-antisymmetric wavefunction is nonzero. Though the energies of these states are _exactly the same_ (at least when $$u=0$$), they can be distinguished in a magnetic field - the $$\mathbf{1}$$ space will split into three energy levels (earning it the name of a triplet) and the $$\mathbf{0}$$ space will not (it's called a singlet). Further, in the context of perturbation theory the presence of a phase difference between the two spatial parts makes a difference - in real helium ($$u=1$$), the energies differ by about 0.03 Hartree!

We can understand the energy splitting when $$u\neq0$$ in a non-perturbatve way as well. In
particular, consider restricting the Hilbert space to $$\mathrm{Span}\{ \ket{\boldsymbol{r}'} \otimes
\mathcal{S} \}$$

## The Spin-Statistics Theorem

It's pretty unsatisfying to just call it a day after grandly declaring that "everything has to be an eigenstate of the permutation
operator". Why?

A theore mwe want to lean on here is the _adiabatic theorem_


Our old friend adiabatic transport is the key. In principle, a `particle' $$\ket{\psi}$$ may be moved through a path $$\gamma$$ by the path translation operator

$$ \hat{T}_\gamma = \exp(i\hat{p} \cdot
\int_\gamma \dot{\gamma}(\tau) d\tau) $$
