---
layout: post
title: "Computational Science Cookbook II: Choosing your Ingredients"
subtitle: C has never been improved on, change my mind
tags: [code, comp-sci]
private: true
katex: true
---



<meta http-equiv="Refresh" content="0; url=https://youtu.be/dQw4w9WgXcQ" />


# Preamble

Equipped with the disproportionate confidence afforded by 2 beers and 3 weeks of
online classes, the first-year compsci student at the pub declares that

> Scientists are stuck in the 1970s. I hear some people are still using FORTRAN!

It goes without saying that computing has changed radically since nuclear physicists at Los Alamos
were calculating collision cross sections of uranium nuclei and Turing and co were cracking enigma.
Of course, tools generally tend to get better over time - We no longer need to manually input
punch-card tape to load programs, and can write in a human-like syntax rather than the whatever this
is:

```
00101 0 0000000000 0 0: T0S 
10101 0 0000000010 0 1: H2S  
00101 0 0000000000 0 2: T0S 
00011 0 0000000110 0 3: E6S 
00000 0 0000000001 0 4: P1S 
00000 0 0000000101 0 5: P5S 
00101 0 0000000000 0 6: T0S 
01000 0 0000000000 0 7: I0S 
11100 0 0000000000 0 8: A0S 
00100 0 0000010000 0 9: R16S 
00101 0 0000000000 1 10: T0L 
01000 0 0000000010 0 11: I2S 
11100 0 0000000010 0 12: A2S 
01100 0 0000000101 0 13: S5S 
00011 0 0000010101 0 14: E21S 
00101 0 0000000011 0 15: T3S 
11111 0 0000000001 0 16: V1S 
11001 0 0000001000 0 17: L8S 
11100 0 0000000010 0 18: A2S 
00101 0 0000000001 0 19: T1S 
00011 0 0000001011 0 20: E11S 
00100 0 0000000100 0 21: R4S 
11100 0 0000000001 0 22: A1S 
11001 0 0000000000 1 23: L0L 
11100 0 0000000000 0 24: A0S 
00101 0 0000011111 0 25: T31S
11100 0 0000011001 0 26: A25S
11100 0 0000000100 0 27: A4S 
00111 0 0000011001 0 28: U25S 
01100 0 0000011111 0 29: S31S 
11011 0 0000000110 0 30: G6S 
```

(FYI this is the bootloader for EDSAC, the first ever practical general-purpose computers built at
Cambridge in 1949) 

Since the original Fortran, great strides have been taken in making things more human readable: In
order of when a language first appeared with their names, the big players (in scicomp at least) are
Fortran, COBOL, C, `sh`,  C++, Mathematica, `bash`, Haskell, Python, Lua, Rust and Julia.

Fortran and C++ are a little contentious - these are ships of Theseus that are now bery different
to their original forms. You *can* technically still write 70's style FORTRAN on a modern computer,
you just *shouldn't*.

# Compiled Languages

## Assembly

This is barely even a language, it's more like a cheat sheet for writing machine code. Unless you
are actually writing a GPU driver, it's unlikely that you will ever need to touch this
brain-destroying thing.

## `FORTRAN`

It's fun to hate on it for being old fashioned, and sure, its syntax is awkward, but
let's not forget that pre-1980 this was the standard for all scientific computing, and remains so to
this day when doing hardcore supercomputer numerics.

[Click here](https://fortran-lang.org/learn) for a good-quality, minimal, 
and up-to-date reference on this language.

**Use this for**

 - Fast simulation code
 - Things that need to interface with old code (e.g. plasma physics sims)
 - Manual control of the bare metal

**Absolutely do not use this for**

 - New projects
 - Data Processing
 - Plotting


## C

Arguably the greatest of the low-level languages. C's clean syntax and revolutionary type system
changed the game when it hit the world in the mid 1970s. `C` is responsible for things we now take for
granted, like curly braces, for loops, structs, function pointers, and lowercase variables. macOS, 
the Linux kernel, the canonical Python
interpreter, and pretty much all GNU software either is written in C or was written in C at some point.
It's an
elegant weapon, from a more civilised time. 

Anything that can be done in fortran can be done just as easily in `C`, it's just a matter of
taste really. 



## C++

Originally "C with Classes", this is now arguably the most common compiled language used today. 



## Rust

Rust sells itself as a language with low-level speed that is memory safe,
which I won't deny is an appealing trait. On the other hand, good old FORTRAN was designed _with
scientific computing in mind_ - after all, that was the original point of a computer - and the newer
stuff is oriented more towards businesses - web technologies, databases, rendering and game engines,
all of which have substantially different requirements. Facebook's servers need to harvest your
data 24/7, and it's unacceptable for them to crash when a weird edge case comes up; your
simulation of an Ising model runs once and exits - feel free to leak memory all you like, 
the OS will clean up after you. The point of scinece code is to be correct and to run fast,
systems-level concerns are really just a distraction.


# Interpreted Languages

## Python


## Bash


## 



# The New Kid on the Block: Julia








> There are only two kinds of languages: the ones people complain about and the ones nobody uses.

 ~ Bjarne Stroustrup, creator of C++
