---
layout: post
title: Statistical mechanics of plasma
subtitle: Diagrammatics in statistical mechanics
tags: [quantum, cond-mat, seminar-series]
private: true
katex: true
---

Thanks go to Salvatore Pace (MIT) for the notes that I used to prepare this post.

Firstly, notation. Statistical mechanics is notoriously challenging to wrap one's head around due to
the need to index all of the particles in a macroscopic system, which inevitably leads to some
lengthy expressions and tortured notations. I am conciously deviating from the canonical notation
here in the vain hope of making the presentation marginally cleaner and less reliant on knowledge of
the canon.

Consider the grand canonical partition function of a gas of several species of interacting, specieswise indistinguishable,
classical particles.
Let the index set for all particles in the gas be $$\Omega(\mathbf{n}) = \{1, ..., n_1\}\times ... \times \{1, ..., n_S\}$$. $S$ is simply the number of species present.
The notation $$ \mathbf{n} = (n_\alpha)_{\alpha \in \text{Species}}$$ indicates a vector in $\mathbb{N}^S$ representing the number of particles in each species. $\mathbb{N}$ includes 0.

$$\mathcal{Z}(\beta, (\mu_a)_{a \in S}) = \sum_{\mathbf{n} \in \mathbb{N}^S} \int \prod_{a\in\text{Species}} \left\{ 
\frac{d\Omega_{a}^{n_a}}{n_a!} \right\} 
\exp\left(-\beta H[ (\mathbf{r}, \mathbf{p})_{j \in \Omega(\mathbf{n})} ] + \sum_{b\in\text{Species}} \beta \mu_b n_b  \right) $$

I've notated a volume of phase space by $d\Omega = \frac{d^3x d^3p}{h^3}$. Classically, $h$ is
needed (with units \[xp\] = \[Energy\]\[Time\], considering $p$ to be canonically conjugate
momenta). Note that this constant _must_ be present if we want the summand to have consistent
dimensions. The factorials account for overcounting due to indistinguishability.

Now, let $H$ describe classical particles with Coulomb interactions,

$$H[ (\mathbf{r}, \mathbf{p})_{j \in \Omega(\mathbf{n})} ] = \sum_{i \in \Omega(\mathbf{n})} \frac{p_i^2}{2 m_i} + \frac{1}{2}\sum_{i\neq j \in
\Omega(\mathbf{n})} e_i e_j V(r_i - r_j)$$

This problem is too hard, but we can make progress using perturbation theory in the weak coupling
limit. We will consider the actions as a perturbation to the ideal gas partition function,


$$\mathcal{Z}(\beta, (\mu_a)_{a \in S}) = \sum_{\mathbf{n} \in \mathbb{N}^S}  \prod_{a\in\text{Species}} \left\{ \int 
\frac{d\Omega_{a}^{n_a}}{n_a!} 
\exp \left( \sum_{j=1}^{n_a} \left[ -\frac{\beta p_j^2}{2 m_a}\right] + \beta \mu_a n_a \right)
\right\} 
$$

$$ = \prod_{a\in\text{Species}}  \exp[V \lambda_a^{-3} z_a] $$

where the final expression is written in terms of the de Broglie wavelength $\lambda_a^2 = 2\pi \hbar^2 \beta/m_a$ and fugacity $z_a = \exp(\beta \mu_a)$.
